## Basics of Viewing Text Files

1. Basic commands for viewing text files

> ``cat`` - Used to concatenate and view text files

> ``less`` - Read-only text viewing utility

> ``head`` - Defaults to displaying the first 10 lines

> ``tail`` - Defaults to displaying the last 10 lines

> ``zcat`` - Used to view gzip compressed text files

> ``bzcat`` - Used to view bunzip2 compressed text files

> ``xzcat`` - Used to view XZ compressed text files

## Text file statistics

1. Basic Text File Statistics

> ``nl`` - Prints the numbers of lines in a file. Output of the command can be modified to fit different cases

> ``wc`` - The word count command. Can be used to print the number of words, lines, or bytes in a file

> ``od`` - The octal dump command. Use to print out a file in octal or many other formats

2. Message digests<br>
The Message digest is a fingerprint of a file. It is the hashed value of the contents of a file.

> ``md5sum`` - Calculates and checks a file's hash based on the MD5 algorithm

> ``sha256sum`` - Calculates and checks a file's hash value based on the SHA-2 hash algorithm using 256 bits

> ``sha512sum`` - Calculates and checks a file's hash value based on the SHA-2 hash algorithm using 512 bits  

## Text manipulation

> ``sort`` - Command used to sort and/or merge lines of a file

> ``uniq`` - Displays unique lines of a file

> ``tr`` - Used to swap characters in a file for another character

> ``cut`` - Extracts columns of fields of data from a file

> ``paste`` - Merges lines of files

> ``sed`` - The **stream editor** command. Used for variety of tasks, commonly utilized to alter text in a file or search and replace words.

> ``split`` - Command that is used to split a file up into individual pieces. By default, each piece of the file contains up to 10000 lines, but this can be changed to a different value of file size.
