## Basic File Commands

> ``ls`` - Command used to display a list of files and directories

> ``touch`` - Command that is used to modify a file's time stamp, but more often used to create an empty file.

> ``cp`` - The copy command, used to make a copy of a file

> ``rm`` - The remove command. Used to delete a file from the system

> ``mv`` - The move command. Used to move or renmae a file

> ``file`` Command used to try and determine a file's type

## Directory Commands

> ``cd`` - The change directory command

> ``mkdir`` - The make directory command

> ``rmdir`` - The remove directory command. Will not delete a directory with any content or files in it

> ``$PATH`` - Environment variable that describes the directories that the currently logged in user can run applications from without specifying their full path

## File and Folder Compression

> ``dd`` - Copies and converts files. Often used to create files of arbitrary size and to back up disk drives. <br>
**Example:**<br>
   - ``dd if=boot.img of=/dev/sdc`` - This will create a bootable flash drive based off of an image file<br>
   - ``dd if=/dev/xvda of=/tmp/mbr.img bs=512 count=1`` - This will create an image of your master boot record in your temp folder. The master boot records is only 512 bytes so we are specifying size and count of the file at the end of command.<br>
   - ``dd if=/dev/random of=file bs=1024k count=1`` - This will create a file with random data in it with the size of 1024k

## Archive and Compression Commands

> ``tar`` - Wraps up file and folders into an archive file. This command does not provide compression on its own. Files created with tar are usually called tar balls<br>
**Example:**<br>
   - ``tar -cf name-of-tarball.tar files-to-tar`` - This will create a simple tar ball with the files you specify <br>
   - ``tar -tf name-of-tarball.tar`` - This will view the files inside a tarball <br>
   - ``tar -xf name-of-tarball.tar`` - This will extract the contents of a tarball <br>
<br>**Using gzip compression:**
   - ``tar -czf name-of-traball.tgz files-to-tar`` - Creates files with gzip compression (same as below)<br>
   - ``tar -czf name-of-tarball.tar.gz files-to-tar`` - Creates files with  gzip compression (same as above)<br>
   - ``tar -xzf name-of-tarball.gz`` - Extract a gzip compressed tarball<br>
<br>**Using bzip2 Compression** <br>
   - ``tar -cjf name-of-tarball.tar.bz2 files-to-tar`` - Creates files with bzip2 compression. Uses CPU to process the compression.
   - ``tar -xjf name-of-tarball.tar.bz2`` - Extracts a bzip2 compressed tarball<br>

> ``bzip2`` - Command that creates ***.bz2** compressed files
- ``bunzip2`` Command that extracts ***.bz2** compressed files

> ``gzip`` - Command that creates ***.gz** compressed files
- ``gunzip`` - Command that extracts ***.gz** compressed files

> ``xz`` - Command that creates ***.xz** compressed files
- ``unxz`` - Command that extracts ***.xz** compressed files
